All right, who's ready for some more category
theory? You're all in the wrong room.
So this talk I hope seems deceptively obvious. One
of the things that's great about this conferences,
this is a pretty cutting edge crowd. A lot of
you are adopting new technologies. A lot of you
are doing functional programming and you may, you
may be nodding saying, yeah, yeah, yeah through
parts of this. And if some of it's familiar then
that's great. On the other hand, I think that
I would hope that you would come away from
this talk with some tools you could use
to help conduct a similar kind
of discussion to this talk
with other people that you're trying
to convince to do the right thing.
So I'll start with an appeal to authority.
"Simplicity is a prerequisite for reliability."
I certainly agree with this. I don't agree
with everything Dijkstra said and I, and I
think he might've been very wrong about proof in
particular, but I think he's right about this.
We need to build simple systems
if we want to build good systems.
And I don't think we focus on enough on that.
I love word origins. They are tremendous
fun. One of the, the reasons why they're
fun is because words eventually become come
to mean whatever we all accept them to mean,
you know, whatever's commonly understood
to be the meaning is what it means.
And it's often interesting to say, well, I wish I
could, I wish we'd go back to what it really means
and use that. And I think there's a couple
of words that I'm going to use in this talk
that I would love for you to come away
knowing the origins of, and try to use
more precisely, especially
when talking about software.
So the first word is "simple". And the roots
of this word are "sim" and "plex", and that
means one fold or one braid or twist. And that
characteristic about being about one literally
fold or twist, of course, one twist, Hey, what's
one twist look like? No twists, right? Actually.
And it, the opposite of this word is complex,
which means braided together or folded together.
Being able to think about software in terms of
whether or not it's folded together, is sort of
the central point of this talk. The other word
we frequently use interchangeably with "simple"
is the word "easy". And the derivation there is
through a French word, and the last step of the
derivation is actually speculative but I bought
it because it serves this talk really well.
And that is from the Latin word that is the
root of "adjacent", and which means to lie near
and to be nearby. And the opposite is "hard".
Of course, the root of hard has nothing to do
with lying near. It doesn't mean lie far away.
It actually means like strong or tortuously so.
So if we want to try to apply simple
to the kinds of work that we do
we're going to start with this
concept of having one braid
and look at it in a few different dimensions.
I thought it was interesting in Eric's
talk to talk about dimensions because it's
definitely a big part of doing design work.
And so if we want to look for simple things,
we want to look for things that have sort of
one of something they do, they have one role,
they fulfill one task or job they're
about accomplishing sort of one objective.
They might be about one concept like security
and sort of overlapping with that as they may,
they may be about a particular dimension
of the problem that you're trying to solve.
The critical thing there though, is that when
you're looking for something that's simple,
you want to see it have focus in these areas.
You don't want to see it combining things. On the
other hand, we can't get too fixated about one.
In particular simple doesn't mean
that there's only one of them.
Right. It also doesn't mean an
interface that only has one operation.
So it's important to distinguish
cardinality, right? Counting things from actual
interleaving what matters for simplicity is that
there's there's no, interleaving not that there's
only one thing. And that's very important.
Okay. The other critical thing about simple
as we've just described it is if something is
interleaved or not that's sort of an objective
thing. We can probably go and look and see,
I don't see any connections. I don't see
anywhere where this twists with something else.
So simple is actually an objective notion.
That's also very important in deciding
the difference between simple, easy.
So let's look at easy. I think
this notion of nearness is really,
really cool. In particular obviously there's
many ways in which something can be near, right.
The sort of the physical notion of it being near
right, is something you know, like right there.
And I think that's where the root of the word came
from. You know, this is easy to obtain cause it's,
it's nearby. It's not in the next
town. I don't have to take a horse or
whatever to go get to it. We don't have the same
notion of physicality necessarily in our software.
But we do sort of have our own
hard drive or our own tool.
Or sort of the ability to make things
physically near by getting them through
things like installers and stuff like that. The
second notion of nearness is something being near
to our understanding, right. Or in our current
skillset. And I don't mean in this case near to
our understanding, meaning a capability, I mean,
literally near something that we already know.
So the word, the word in this
case is, is about being familiar.
I think that collectively we are infatuated
with these two notions of easy. We are just so
self-involved in these two aspects
it's hurting us tremendously.
All we care about is, you know, can I get this
instantly and start running it in five seconds?
It could be this giant hairball that you
got, but all you care is "can you get it?".
In addition, we're fixated on,
oh, I can't, I can't read that.
I can't read German. Does that mean German
is unreadable? No, I don't know German.
So you know, this, this sort of
approach is, is definitely not helpful.
In particular, if you want everything to
be familiar, you will never learn anything
new because it can't be significantly
different from what you already know
and not drift away from the familiarity.
There's a third aspect of being easy that
I don't think we think enough about. That's
going to become critical to this discussion, which
is, which now is being near to our capabilities.
And we don't like to talk about this because
it makes us uncomfortable because what kind of
capabilities are we're talking about? Like, if
we're talking about easy in the case of violin
playing or piano playing or mountain climbing
or something like that. Well, you know, I don't
personally feel bad if I don't play the violin
well, because I don't play the violin at all.
But the work that we're in is conceptual
work. So when we talked, start talking about
something being outside of our capability
well, you know, it really starts trampling
on our, our egos in a big way. And so,
you know, due to a combination of hubris
and insecurity we never really talk about whether
or not something is outside of our capabilities.
It ends up that it's not so embarrassing after
all, because we don't have tremendously divergent
abilities in that area. The last
thing I want to say about easy
and the critical thing to distinguish
it from simple is that easy is relative,
right? Playing the violin and reading
German are really hard for me.
They're easy for other people, certain other
people. So unlike simple, where we can go and
look for interleaving, look for braiding. Easy
is always going to be, you know, easy for whom
or hard for whom. It's a relative term. The
fact that we throw these things around sort
of casually saying, oh, I like to use
that technology because it's simple.
And when I'm saying simple, I mean easy. And
when I'm saying easy, I mean, because I already
know something that looks very much a like,
that is how this whole thing degrades, and we
can never have an objective discussion about the
qualities that matter to us in our software. So
what's one critical area where we, where
we have to distinguish these two things and
and look at them from a perspective
of them being easy and being simple?
It is, it has to do with constructs and artifacts,
right? We program with constructs, we have
programming languages, we use particular libraries
and those things in and of themselves when we
look at them, like when we look at the code,
we've right have certain characteristics in and
of themselves, but we're in a business of art.
Right. We don't ship source code and the user
doesn't look at our source code and say, okay, oh,
that's so pleasant, right? No, they run
our software and they run it for a long
period of time. And over time we keep
glomming more stuff on our software,
all that stuff, stuff, the running
of it. The performance of it,
the ability to change it all is an attribute
of the artifact, not the original construct.
But again, here, we still focus so much on our
experience of the use of the construct. Look,
I only had to type 16 characters. Wow. That's
great. No semicolon or things like that.
This whole notion of sort of
programmer convenience. Again,
we are infatuated with it.
Not, not to our benefit.
On the flip side, it gets even worse. Our
employers are also infatuated with it, right.
Those first two meanings of easy. What do they
mean. Right. If I can get another programmer in
here. Right. And they look at your source code and
they think it's familiar. Right. And they already
know the toolkit, right. So it's near, at hand.
They've always had the same tool in their toolkit.
They can read it. I can replace you.
It's a breeze, especially if I ignore
the third notion of easy. Which is whether
or not anybody could understand your code.
Right. Because they don't actually care about
that. They just care if somebody can go sit in
your seat, start typing. So again, as sort
of a business owners this sort of again,
the same kind of focus on those first two aspects
of easy, cause it makes programmers replaceable.
So we're going to see, we're going to contrast
this with the impacts of long-term use.
Right. What does it mean to use this
long-term and uh, yeah, what what's there,
what's there as all the meat, right? Does
the software do what it's supposed to do?
Is it of high quality? Can we rely
on it doing what it's supposed to do?
Can we fix problems when they arise?
And if we're given a new requirement,
can we change it? These things have nothing
to do with the construct as we typed it in
or very little to do with it and have a lot
to do with the attributes of the artifact.
We have to start assessing our
constructs based around the artifacts,
not around the look and feel of the experience
of typing it in or the cultural aspects of that.
So let's talk a little about bit
about limits. Oh, look, it does move.
This is just supposed to sort of lull you into
this state where everything I say seems true
because I can't use monads to do that.
This stuff is pretty simple logic, right? How
can we possibly make things that are reliable
that we don't understand? Right. It's very, very
difficult. I think Professor Sussman made a great
point saying there's going to be this trade-off
right. As we make things more flexible and
extensible and dynamic in some possible futures
for some kinds of systems we are going to make
a trade-off in our ability to, to understand their
their behavior and make sure that they're correct.
But for the things that we want to understand and
make sure are correct, we're going to be limited.
We're going to be limited in our understanding
and our understanding is very limited,
right? There's the whole notion of, you
know, how many, how many balls can you
keep in the air at the time? Or how many
things can you keep in mind at a time?
It's a, it's a limited number and it's a very
small number . Right. So we can only consider
a few things. And when things are intertwined
together, we lose the ability to take them in
isolation. So if every time I think I pull out
a new part of the software I need to comprehend
and it's attached to another thing I had to
pull that other thing into my mind because I
can't think about the one without the other.
That's the nature of them being intertwined.
So every intertwining is adding this burden and
the burden is kind of combinatorial as to the
number of things that we can, we can consider. So
fundamentally this complexity and by complexity,
I mean this braiding together of things is
going to limit our ability to understand our
So so how do we change our software? Apparently
I heard in the talk today that agile and extreme
programming have shown that refactoring and
tests allow us to make a change with zero.
I never knew that. I still do not know that
because that's not actually a
knowable thing. It's, that's phooey,
If you're going to change software,
you're going to need to analyze
what it does and make decisions about
what it ought to do. You know, I mean,
at least you're going to have to go and say,
what is the impact of this potential change,
right. And what parts of the software do
I need to go to, to affect the change?
And you know, I don't, I don't care if we're using
XP or Agile or anything else you're not going to
get around the fact that if you can't reason about
your program, you can't make these decisions.
But I do want to make clear here because a lot
of people, as soon as they hear the word reason
about they're like, oh my God, are you saying
that you have to be able to prove programs?
I am not. I don't believe in that.
I don't think that's an objective.
I'm just talking about informal reasoning,
the same kind of reasoning we use every day to
decide what we're going to do. We do not take out
category theory and say, you know, we, we actually
can reason without it. Thank goodness.
So what about, what about the other side?
Right? There's two things you do with the future
of your software. One is you add new capabilities.
The other thing is you fix the ones you didn't
get, you know, so, you know, done so well. And
I like to ask this question. What's true of
every bug found in the field? Got written.
It got written. Yes. What's a
more interesting fact about it.
It passed the type checker. What else did it do?
It passed all the tests. Okay. So now what do
you do? Right. I think we're in this world. I'd
like to call it guard rail programming. Right.
It's really, really sad. We're like,
I can make change cause I have tests.
Right? Who does that? Who drives their
car around banging against the door?
I'm glad I've got these guard rails because
I'd never make it to to the show on time.
Right. And, and do the guard rails
help you get to where you want to go?
Like the guard rails, like guide you places. No,
those guard rails everywhere. They don't, they
don't point your car in any particular direction.
So again, we're going to need to be able to
think about our program. It's going to be
critical. All of our guard rails will fall. We'll
have failed us. We're going to have this problem.
We're going to need to be able to reason about our
program say, well, you know what? I, because maybe
if it's not too complex, I'll be able to say,
I know through ordinary logic it couldn't be in
this part of the program. It must be in that part.
And let me go look there first, things like that.
Now, of course, everybody's going to start
moaning, but I have all this speed. I'm agile
and fast. You know, this easy stuff is making
my life good cause I have a lot of speed.
So what kind of runner can run as fast as they
possibly can from the very start of a race, right?
Only somebody who runs really short races. Okay.
But of course we are programmers and we're smarter
than runners apparently because we know how to fix
that problem. Right. We just fire the starting
pistol, every a hundred and call it a new sprint.
I don't know why they haven't figured that out,
but right. It's my contention based on experience
that if you ignore complexity, you will slow down.
You will invariably slow down over the long haul.
Of course, if you are doing something that's
really short term, you don't need any of this.
You could write it, you know, with ones and
zero's and this is my really scientific graph.
You notice how none of the axes are, there's no
numbers on it. Cause I just, I completely made
it up. It's a, it's an experiential graph.
And what it shows is if you focus on ease
and ignore simplicity. So I'm not saying you
can't try to do both. But if you focus on ease
you will be able to go as fast as possible from
the beginning of the race, but no matter what
technology you use or sprints or firing pistols or
whatever the complexity will eventually kill you.
It will kill you in a way that will
make every sprint accomplish less.
Most sprints be about completely
redoing things you've already done.
And the net effect is you're not moving forward
in any significant way. Now, if you start by
focusing on simplicity, why can't you go as
fast as possible, right at the beginning?
Okay. Right. Cause some, some tools that are
simple are actually as easy to use as some tools
that are not, why can't you go as fast, then
you have to think you have to actually apply
some simplicity, work to the problem before you
start. And that's going to be maybe this ramp up.
So one of the problems I think we have is
this conundrum that some things that are easy
actually are, are complex.
So let's look. There are a bunch of constructs
that have complex artifacts that are very
succinctly described, right? Some of the things
that are really dangerous to use are like so
simple to describe they're incredibly familiar,
right? If you're coming from object orientation,
you're familiar with a lot of complex
things they're very much available, right.
And they're easy to use. In fact, by all measures,
conventional measures, you would
look at them and say, this is easy.
Right. But we don't care about that. Right.
Again, the user's not looking at our software
and they don't actually care very much about
how good a time we had when we were writing it.
Right. What they care about is what the
program does and the, and if it works well,
it will, it will be related to whether
or not the output of those constructs
were simple. In other words, what,
what complexity do they yield?
When there is complexity there? We're
going to call that incidental complaint.
Right. It wasn't part of what the user asked us
to do. We chose the tool, it had some inherent
complexity in it. It's incidental to the
problem. I didn't put the definition in here.
But incidental is Latin for "your fault".
and it is, I think you really
have to ask yourself, you know,
are you programming with a loom?
You know, you're having a great
time. You're throwing that shuttle back and
forth and what's coming out the other side
is this knotted, you know, mess. I mean, it may
look pretty, but you have this problem, right?
Where's the problem. The problem is the knitted
castle, right? Do you want a knitted castle?
What benefits do we do we get from
simplicity? We get ease of understanding,
right? That's sort of definitional. I contend we
get ease of change and easier debugging. Other
benefits that come out of it that are sort of on
the secondary level are increased flexibility.
And when we talk more about modularity and
breaking things apart, we'll see where they,
where that falls like the ability to
change policies or move things around. Right. As
we make things simpler, we get more independence
of decisions because they're not interleaved. So
I can make a location decision that's orthogonal
from a like a performance decision. And I really
do want to make, you know, ask the question
agilist or whatever it is is having a test
suite and refactoring tools going to make
changing the knitted castle faster than changing
the Lego castle. No way, completely unrelated.
Okay. So how do we make things easy?
Presumably, you know, the objective here is
not to just bemoan the software crisis. Right?
So what can we do to make things
easier? So we'll look at those
parts, those aspects of being easy.
Again, there's a location aspect,
making something at hand, putting it in
our tool kit. That's relatively simple.
Right? We just install it. Right. Maybe
it's a little bit harder because we have
to get somebody to say, it's okay to use it. Then
there's the aspect of how do I make it familiar?
Right. I may not have ever seen this
before. That's a learning exercise.
I've got to, you'll get a book, go take a
tutorial, have somebody to explain it to me.
Maybe try it out. Both these things are we're
driving, we're driving. We install, we learn
where it's totally in our hands. Then we have
this other part though. Right. Which is the mental
capability part. And does the part, that's always
hard to talk about the mental capability part.
Maybe because the fact is
we can learn more things.
We actually can't get much smarter. We're
not going to move. We're not going to move
our brain closer to the complexity. We have
to make things near by simplifying them.
The, but the truth here is not that
that's like there are these super,
super you know, bright people who can do these
amazing things and, and everybody else is stuck.
Because the juggling analogy is pretty
close, right? The average juggler can do
three balls. The most amazing juggler in
the world can do like nine balls or 12 or
something like that. They can't do 20 or a
hundred. Right? All, we're all very limited,
you know, compared to the complexity
we can create, we're all, you know,
statistically at the same point in our ability
to understand it, which is not very good.
So we're going to have to bring things towards
us and because we can only juggle so many balls,
you have to make a decision.
How many of those balls
do you want to be incidental complexity and
how many do you want to be? Right. How many
extra balls you won't have somebody throwing your
balls that you have to try to incorporate in here?
Oh, use this tool. And you're like, whoa. You
know, more, more stuff who wants to do that?
All right. So let's look
at a, let's look at a fact.
So I've been on the other side of this
complaint and I, I like it. We can look
at it really quickly. Only because it, it's
not, this analysis has nothing to do with the
usage. This complexity analysis is just about the
programmer experience, right. So parens are hard,
right? They're not at hand for most
people who haven't otherwise used it.
And what does that mean? It means that like,
they don't have an editor that knows how to do,
you know, paren matching or move stuff around
structurally, or they have one and they've never
loaded the mode that makes that happen. Totally
given. Right. It's. Nor is it familiar? I mean,
everybody's seen parentheses, but they
haven't seen them on that side of the method!
I mean, it's just crazy,
but you know, I think this it's,
this is your responsibility,
right? To fix these two things
as a user, as a potential user,
you got to do this. But we could dig deeper. Let's
look at the third thing. Did you actually give me
something that was simple. Is a language built
all out of parens simple in the case I'm saying?
Is it free of interleaving and braiding? And
the answer is no right. CommonLisp and Scheme
are not simple in this sense, in their use of
parens because the use of parentheses in those
languages is overloaded, right? Parens wrap calls,
they wrap grouping, they wrap data structures,
right? That overloading is a form of complexity
by the definition of, you know, I gave you, right.
And so if you actually bothered to get
your editor set up and learn that the
parenthesis goes on the other side of the
verb this was still a valid complaint. Now,
of course, everybody was saying easy. It's
hard. It's complex in that we're using these
words really weekly. Right. But it was hard
for a couple of reasons you could solve.
And it was not simple for a reason that
was the fault of the language designer,
which was that there was overloading. Right. And
we can fix that. Right. Just add another data
structure. It doesn't make lists, not lisp to have
more data structures, right. It's still a language
defined in terms of its own data structures, but
having more data structures in play means that
we can get rid of this overloading in this
case, which then makes it your fault again.
Right. Because now this, the
simplicity is back in the construct.
And it's just a familiarity thing,
which you can solve for yourself.
Okay. This is an old dig at list programmers.
I'm not totally sure what the what he was talking
about. I believe it was a performance related
thing that lispers would just, they cons'ed up
all this memory and they did all this evaluation
and it was, it was a pig. LISP programs at that
time were, were LISP programs at that time
were complete pigs relative to the hardware.
So they, you know, they knew the value of
all these constructs, right? This dynamism,
dynamic nature, these things are all great.
They are valuable. Right. But there was this
performance cost. I'd like to lift this whole
phrase and apply it to all of us right now.
Right. As programmers, we are
looking at all kinds of things.
And I just see it, you know, read hacker news
or whatever. It's like, oh, look, this thing has
this benefit. Oh, great. I'm going to do that.
Oh, but this has this benefit. Oh, that's cool.
Oh, that's awesome. You know, that's shorter.
You never see in these discussions, was there a
trade off? Is there any downside, you know, is
there anything bad that comes along with this?
Never nothing. It's just like, we look all for
benefits, right? So as programmers now, I think
we're, we're looking all for benefits and we're
not looking carefully enough at the byproducts.
So what's in your toolkit. I have
you know, I have these two columns,
one says complexity, and one says, simplicity,
the simplicity column just being simpler.
It doesn't mean that the things
over there are purely simple.
I didn't label these things bad and
good. I'm leaving your minds to do that.
So what, what things are complex and what are
the simple replacements. I'm going to dig into
the details on these. So I won't actually
explain why they're complex. We're going
to say state and objects are complex and values
are simple and can replace them. In many cases,
I'm going to say methods are complex and
functions are simple and namespaces are simple.
And the reason why methods are there because often
the, the space of methods the class or whatever
is also a mini very poor namespace. vars
are complex, and variables are complex.
Managed references are also
complex, but they're still simpler.
Inheritance, switch statements, pattern matching
are all complex and polymorphism ala carte is
simple. Okay. Now remember the meaning of simple,
meaning of simple means unentangled. Right.
Not twisted together with something else. It
doesn't mean I already know what it means. Right?
Simple. Does not mean "I already know what it
means." Okay. Syntax is complex. Data is simple.
Imperative loops, fold, even
which seems kind of higher level
still has some implications
that tie two things together.
Whereas set functions are simpler.
Actors are complex and cues are simpler.
ORM is complex and declarative
data manipulation is simpler.
Okay. Even Eric said that in his talk,
he said it really fast near the end.
"Oh yeah. And eventual consistency
is really hard for programs."
Conditionals are complex in interesting ways and
rules can be, can be simpler. And inconsistency
is very complex. It's almost definitionally
complex, right? Because consistent means
to stand together. So inconsistent means to
stand apart. And that means taking a set of
things that are standing apart and trying
to think about them all at the same time.
It's inherently complex to do that. And anybody
who's tried to use a system that's eventually
consistent knows that. Okay. So there's this
really cool word called complect. I found it.
I love it. It means to
interleave or entwine or braid.
Okay. I want to start talking about what
we do to our software that makes it bad.
I don't want to say braid or entwine
because it doesn't really have the good,
bad connotation that complect has.
Complect is obviously bad. Right?
It happens to be an archaic word, but you
know, there's no rules that say you can't
start using them again. So I'm going
to use them for the rest of the talk.
So what do you know about
"complect"? It's bad. Don't do it.
Right. This is where complexity comes from.
Right? Complecting. That's very simple.
Right? And in particular, it's something
that you want to avoid in the first place.
Right? Look at this diagram. Look at
the first one. Look at the last one,
right? It's the same stuff in both those diagrams,
the exact it's the same strips. What happened?
They got complected. And now it's hard to
understand the bottom diagram from the top
one, but it's the same stuff.
You're doing this all the time.
You can make a program, a hundred different ways.
Some of them it's just hanging there. It's
all straight. You look at it. You say, oh,
I see it's four lines this program, right. Then
you could type in four lines in another language
or with a different construct. And you end up with
this knot. So you've got to take care of that.
So "complect" actually means to braid together.
And "compose" means to place together.
And we know that right. Everybody keeps telling
us what we want to do is make composable systems.
We just want to place things together, which
is great. And I think there's no disagreement,
right? Composing simple components. Simple in that
same respect is the way we write robust software.
So it's simple. Right? All we need to
do is (everybody knows this I'm up here
just telling you stuff you know), we can make
simple systems by making them modular. Right.
We're done. I'm like halfway through my talk.
I don't even know if I'm going to finish.
It's so simple, right? This is it. This is
the key. No, it's obviously not the key.
Right? Who has seen components that
have this kind of characteristic?
I'll raise my hand twice because not enough people
are raising their hands. It's ridiculous. Right?
What happens? You can write modular software
with all kinds of interconnections between them,
right? They may not call each other,
but they're completely complected.
Right. And we know how to solve this. It has
nothing to do with the fact that there are
two things it has to do with what those
two things are allowed to think about.
If you want to really anthropomorphize and what
do we want to make things allowed to think about?
And only these things, some abstractions, I
don't know if that's coming out that well,
that's a dashed white version
of the top of the LEGO, right?
That's all we want to limit things to. Cause now
the blue guy doesn't really know anything about
the yellow guy and the yellow guy doesn't
really know anything about the blue guy
and they both become simple. So
it's very, it's very important
that you don't associate simplicity with
partitioning and stratification, right?
They don't. Right. They are enabled
by it. If you make simple components,
you can horizontally separate them
and you can vertically stratify them.
Right. But you can also do that with complex
things and you're going to get no benefits.
And so I would encourage you to be particularly
careful not to be fooled by code organization.
Right. There's tons of libraries that look,
oh, look, there's different classes. They're
separate classes. They, you know, they call
each other and sort of these nice ways,
right. Then you get out in
the field and you're like,
oh my God, this thing presumes, that, that
thing never returns to number 17. What is that?
Okay. I'm not going to get up here and tell
you, state is awesome. I like state. I'm not
a functional whatever guy, whenever I'm going
to say instead I did this and it sucks. Right.
I did years and years, C++ you know, He-Man
stateful programming. It's, it's really not fun.
It's not good. It's, it's never simple. Having
state in your program is never simple, right?
Because it has a fundamental complecting that
goes on in its artifacts, right? It complects
value in time. You don't have the
ability to get a value independent of,
of time, and sometimes not an ability to get
a value in any proper sense at all. But again,
it's a great example. This is
easy. It's totally familiar.
It's at hand, it's an, all the programming
languages. This is so easy. This complexity
is so easy. Okay. And you can't get
rid of it, everything. So I'll have I
have modularity. And that, that assignment
statement is inside a method, right? Well,
if every time you call that method with the
same arguments, you can get a different result.
Guess what happened? That complexity. It
just leaked right out of there. It doesn't
matter that you can't see the variable,
right? If the thing that's wrapping it is
stateful. And the thing that's wrapping
that is still stateful. In other words,
by stateful, I mean, every time we ask it the
same question, you get a different answer.
You have this complexity and it's like
poison and it's like dropping, you know,
some, some dark liquid into this, to a vase. It's
just going to end up all over the place. The only
time you can really get rid of it is when you
put it inside something that's able to present
a functional interface on the outside, a true
functional interface, same input, same output.
You can't mitigate it through the
ordinary code organization things.
And note in particular, I didn't
talk about concurrency here.
This is not about concurrency. This has nothing
to do with concurrency. It's about your ability
to understand your program. Your program was
out there, it's single-threaded it didn't work.
All the tests passed. It, made it through
the type checker, figure out what happened,
right? If it's full of variables, where are
you going to need to try that? Recreate the
state that was happening at the client when
it went bad. Is that going to be easy? No.
But we fixed this, right? Your language, your
new shiny language has something called var
or maybe it has refs or references.
None of these constructs make state simple.
That's the first primary thing. I don't want
to say that even of Clojure's constructs,
they do not make state simple in the case
I'm talking about in the, in the
nature of simple I'm talking about
but they're not the same, right? They
all do warn you when you have state.
And that's great. Most people who are
using a language where immutability is
not the default, and you have to go out of
your way to get it, finds that the programs
they end up writing have dramatically like
orders of magnitude, less state than they
would otherwise. Cause they never needed
all the other state in the first place.
So that's really great. But I will call
out Clojure and Haskell's references as
being particularly superior in
dealing with this because they
compose values and time. They're
actually little constructs that do
two things. They have some abstraction over
time and the ability to extract the value.
That's really important. Because that's, that's
your path back to simplicity. I mean, if I have
a way to get out of this thing and get a value
out, I can continue with my program after I've
passed that variable to somebody else or
a reference to something that's going to
find the variable every time through the varying
thing, I'm poisoning the rest of my system.
So you know, look at the var in your
language and ask if it does the same,
the same thing. All right, let's see why
things are complex. State. We already
talked about it complects everything
it touches. objects, complect state,
identity and value. They mix these three things
up in a way that you cannot extricate the parts.
Methods complect function and state ordinarily,
right? In addition, in some languages they
complect namespaces right. Derive from two
things in Java, they have the same name, method.
It doesn't work. syntax, interestingly
complects meaning and order often
in a very unidirectional way.
Professor Sussman made the great point about data
versus syntax and it, you know, it's super true.
I don't care how much you really love the syntax
of your favorite language. It's inferior to data
in every way. Inheritance complects types,
right? So it says these two types are complected,
that's what it means. Inheritance.
Complecting. It's like it's,
it's definitional, right? Switching and matching.
They complect multiple pairs of
who's going to do something and
what happens. Right. And they do it all in
one place in a closed way. That's very bad.
Vars and variables, again, complect value
in time, often in an inextricable way, you
can't obtain a value. We saw a picture during a
keynote yesterday this amazing memory, right where
you could dereference uh, an address and get an
object out. I want to get one of those computers.
Right. Have you ever used one of those
computers? I can't get one. I called Apple
and they were like, no. The only thing you can
never get out of a memory address is a word,
a scalar, right? The thing that was all
derided, right? Recovering a composite
object from an address. It's not something
computers do. None of the ones that we have.
So variables have the same problem. You
can not recover a composite mutable thing
with, with one dereference. Loops and fold
loops are pretty obviously. Complecting what
you're doing and how to do it. Fold is a little
bit more subtle, right? Cause it seems like this
nice. Somebody else has taken care of it, but
it does have this implication about the order
of things this left to right bit. Actors complect
what's going to be done and who's going to do it.
Now professor Sussman said the, all these
talks have acronyms and I couldn't actually
modify my slides in time. So object relational
mapping has, oh my God complecting going on.
You can't even begin to talk
about how, how bad it is.
Right. And, and, and you know, if
you're going to do like, duals, right?
What's the dual of value, is it co-alue?
What's a co-value? It's an inconsistent.
Who wants that. And conditionals, I
think are interesting, right? This is,
this is sort of more cutting edge area. We
have a bunch of sort of rules about what
our program's supposed to do. It's
strewn all throughout the program.
Can we fix that? because that's complected with
the structure of the program and
the organization of the program.
All right. So if you take away two things
from this talk one would be the difference
between the words "simple" and "easy". The
other, I would hope would be the fact that
we can create precisely the same programs we're
creating right now with these tools of complexity
with dramatically drastically simpler tools.
Right. I did C++ for a long time, I did Java. I
did C#. I know how to make big systems in those
languages. And I completely. You do not need all
that complexity. You can write as sophisticated
a system with dramatically simpler tools, which
means you're gonna be focusing on the system,
what is supposed to do instead of all the guck
that falls out of the constructs you're using.
So I'd love to say the first step in getting a
simpler life is to just choose simpler stuff,
right? So if you want values, usually you
can get it. Most languages have something
like values final or, or val you know, lets
you like declare something as being immutable.
You do want to find some persistent collections.
Cause the harder thing in a lot of languages
is getting aggregates that are values,
right? You got to find a good library for that
or use a language where that's the default.
Functions. Most languages have them. Thank
goodness. If you don't know what they are, they're
like stateless methods. Namespaces is something
you really need the language to do for you.
And unfortunately, it's not done very
well in a lot of places. Data. Please,
programmers. We supposedly
write data processing programs.
There's all these programs, they don't
have any data in them. They have all these
constructs. We put around it and globbed on
top of data. Data is actually really simple.
There's not, there's not a tremendous number of
variations in the central nature of data,
right? There are maps. There are sets, there are
linear, sequential things. There's not a
lot of other conceptual categories of data.
We create hundreds of thousands of variations,
have nothing to do with the essence of the stuff
and make it hard to write programs that
manipulate the essence of the stuff.
We should just manipulate the essence of
the stuff it's not hard. It's simpler. Also
same thing for communications, right? Are we
all not glad we don't use the Unix method of
communicating on the web? Any arbitrary command
string can be the argument list for your program
and any arbitrary set of characters can come
out the other end. Let's all write parsers.
No, I mean, it's, it's a problem.
It's, it's a source of complexity,
right? So we can get rid of that. Just use
data. The biggest thing, I think the most
desirable thing, the most esoteric, this
is tough to get, but boy, when you have it,
your life is completely, totally different
thing is polymorphism ala carte, right?
Clojure protocols and Haskell type classes. And,
and constructs like that give you the ability
to independently say I have data structures.
I have definitions of sets of functions and I
can connect them together. And those
are three independent operations.
In other words the genericity is not tied to
anything in particular. It's available ala carte.
I don't know of a lot of library solutions for
languages that don't have it. Already talked about
managed references and how to get them. Maybe you
can use Clojure's from different Java languages.
Set functions. You can get from libraries.
Queues, you can get from libraries,
right? You don't need a
special communication language.
You can get declarative data manipulation
by using SQL or learning SQL finally,
or something like LINQ or something like
datalog. I think these last couple of things are
harder, right? We don't have a lot
of ways to do this. Well-integrated
with our languages. I think at currently,
LINQ is an effort to do that. Rules, right?
Declarative rule systems, instead of embedding
a bunch of conditionals in our raw language at
every point of decision, it's nice to sort of
gather that stuff and put it over someplace
else. And you can get rules systems in libraries,
or you can use languages like Prolog. If you want
consistency, you need to use
transactions and you need to use values.
Okay. There are reasons why you
might have to get off of this list,
but boy, there's no reason why you shouldn't start
with it. Okay. There's a source of complexity.
That's really difficult to deal with and not your
fault. Call it environmental complexity, right?
Our programs end up running on machines next to
other programs next to other parts of themselves.
And they contend, they contend for stuff,
right? Memory, CPU cycles, and things like that.
Everybody's contending for it. This is an inherent
complexity. Inherent is Latin for "not your fault"
in the implementation space. And
those is not part of the problem,
but it is part of the implementation, right?
You can't go back to the customer and say,
the thing you wanted is not good because I
have GC problems. But did you see problems
and stuff like that? They, they come into
play. There's not a lot of great solutions,
right? You can do segmentation. You can say,
this is your memory. This is your memory.
This is your memory. This is your CPU and your
CPU. But there's tremendous waste in that,
right? Because you pre allocate, you don't use
everything, you don't have sort of dynamic nature.
But the problem I think we're facing, and
it's not one for which I have a solution
at the moment, is that the policies
around this stuff don't compose.
Right. If everybody says I'll just
size my thread pool to be the number of
cores. Well, how many times
can you do that in one program.
Not a lot and have it still work out. Yeah.
So unfortunately a lot of things like that
splitting that stuff up and making an individual
decision is not actually making things simpler.
It's making things complex because
that's a decision that needs to be made
by someone who has better information. And I
don't think we have a lot of good sources for,
organizing those decisions in, in single places,
in our systems. This is a hugely long quote.
Basically it says programming is not about typing,
it's about thinking. So the next phase here,
I gotta move a little bit quicker is how do we
design simple things of our own? Right. So the
first part of making things simple is just to
choose constructs that have simple artifacts,
but we have to write our own constructs sometimes.
So how do we abstract for simplicity, right.
And abstract again, here's an actual definition,
not made up one, means to draw something away.
And in particular it means to draw away from
the physical nature of something. I do want to
distinguish this from the, sometimes people
use this term really grossly to just mean
hiding stuff. That is not what abstraction is,
and that's not going to help you in this space.
There's too you know, I can't totally explain how
this is done. It's really the job of designing.
But one approach you can take is just
to do who, what, when, where, why. Well,
you can just go through those things
and sort of look at everything you're
deciding to do and say, what
is the who aspect of this?
What is the, what aspect of it?
This can help you take stuff apart.
The other thing is to maintain the approach that
says, I don't know, I don't want to know. I once
said that so often during a C++ course I was
teaching that one of the students made me a shirt.
It was a Booch diagram. Cause we didn't have,
have a, whatever it is now, the unified one.
And every line just said that
that's what you want to do. You really just
don't want to know. All right. So what is,
what? What is the operations? You know, what,
what is, what is it, what we want to accomplish,
right. We're going to form abstractions by taking
functions or more particularly sets of functions
and giving them names. In particular you're going
to use whatever your language lets you use. Right?
So if you only have interfaces, you'll use
that if you have protocols or type classes,
you'll use those. So all those things are in
the category. The things you use to make sets
of functions that are going to be abstractions
and sets of specifications of functions.
The point I'd like to get across today
is just that they should be really small,
much smaller than what we typically
see. Java interfaces are huge.
And the reason why they are huge is just
because Java doesn't have union types. So
it's inconvenient to say this function takes, you
know, something that does this and that, and that
you have to make a, this
and that and that interface.
So we see these giant interfaces. And the thing
with those giant interfaces is that's a lot
harder to break up those programs. So you're gonna
represent them with your polymorphism constructs,
they're specifications, right? They're
not actually the implementations.
They should only use values and other
abstractions in their definitions.
So you're gonna define interfaces or whatever type
classes that only take interfaces and type classes
or values and return them. And the biggest problem
you have when you're doing this part of design is
if you complect this with how. Right. You can
complect it with how by jamming them together
and saying here's just a concrete function instead
of having an interface or here's a concrete class,
instead of having an interface, you can
also complect it with how more subtly
by having some implication of the
semantics of the function dictate how it
is done. And fold is an example of that.
Strictly separating what from how is the
key to making how somebody else's problem,
right? If you've done this really well, you can,
you can pawn off the work of how on somebody else.
You can say, database engine, you figure out how
to do this thing or a logic engine, you figure
out how to search for this. I don't need to know.
Who is about like data or entities. These
are the things that are abstractions are
going to be connected to eventually,
depending on how your technology works,
you want to build components up from sub
components in a sort of direct injection style,
right? You don't want to like
hardwire what the sub-components are.
You want to as much as possible, take them as
arguments because that's going to give you more
programmatic flexibility in how you build.
You should have probably many more sub-components
than you have. So you want really much smaller
interfaces than you have and more sub-components
than you probably are typically having, because
usually you have none and then maybe you have one
when you decide, do I need to farm out policy?
Yes. If you go in saying this is a job and I've
done, who, what, when, where, why? And I found
five components, don't feel bad. That's
great. You're winning massively by doing that,
you know, split out policy and stuff like
that. And the thing that you have to be
aware of when you're building, you know, the
definition of a thing from sub-components
is any, any of those kinds of, you know,
red, yellow, thinking about blue, blue,
thinking about yellow, kind of hidden detail
dependencies. So you want to avoid that.
How things happen. This is the actual
implementation code, the work of,
of doing the job. You, you strictly
want to connect these things together,
using those polymorphism constructs. That's the
most powerful thing. Yeah you can use a switch
statement. You could use pattern matching,
but it's glomming all this stuff together.
If you use one of these systems, you have an open
polymorphism policy, and that is really powerful,
especially if it's runtime open, but even if it's
not, it's better than nothing. And again, bewware
of obstructions that dictate how in some subtle
way, because when you do that, you're really,
you're nailing the person down the line who has to
do the implementation, you're tying their hands.
So the more declarative things are the better,
the better things work. And the thing that
I mean, how is sort of the bottom, right?
Don't mix this up with anything else. All
these implementations should be islands as much as
possible. When and where, this is pretty simple.
I think you just have to strenuously,
avoid comparing this with anything.
I see it accidentally coming in, mostly when
people design systems with directly connected
objects. Right? So if you know, the, if
your program is architected such that,
you know, this thing deals with the
input, and then this thing has to do
the next part of the job. Well, if, if thing
A calls thing B you just complected it, right?
And now you have a when and where thing, cause now
A has to know where B is in order to call B.
And when that happens is whenever A, does it
right? Stick a queue in there, right? Queues are
the way to just get rid of this problem. If you're
not using queues extensively, you should be, you
should right away, like right after this talk.
And then this is the why part, this
is sort of the policy and rules.
This is this is, I think this is hard for
us. We typically put this stuff all over
our application. And if you ever have to talk
to a customer about what the application does,
it's really difficult to sit with
them in source code and look at it.
Now, if you have one of these pretend testing
systems that lets you write English strings
so the customer can look at that. That's just
silly. Right? You should have code that does
the work that somebody can look at, which means
to try to, you know put this stuff someplace
outside, try to find a declarative system or a
rule system which will let you you do this work.
Finally in this area information, it is simple,
right? The only thing you can possibly do with
information is ruin it. Right? Don't do it. Right.
Don't do this stuff. We, I mean, we got it.
Objects, objects just made to like encapsulate
IO devices. So there's a screen, but I can't like
touch the screen, so I have an object, right?
There's a mouse. I can't touch the mouse's object.
Right. That's all they're good for. They were
never supposed be applied to information and we
apply them to information. That's it's just wrong.
It's wrong. But I can now say it's wrong for a
reason, right? It's wrong. Cause it's complex.
In particular, it, it ruins your ability
to build generic data manipulation things.
If you leave data alone, right. You can build
things once that manipulate data and you can
reuse them all over the place and you know,
they're right once and you're done. Yeah. The
other thing about it, which also applies to ORM
is that it will tie your logic to representational
things, which again, tying complexing,
intertwining, so represent data as data.
Please start using maps and sets
directly. Don't feel like I have
to write a class now because I have a new
piece of information. That's just silly.
So the final aspect, right? So
we we've, we choose simple tools.
We write simple stuff and then sometimes we have
to simplify other people's stuff. In particular,
we, we may have to simplify the problem
space or some code that somebody else wrote.
This is a whole separate talk. I'm
not going to get into right now.
But the job is essentially one of
disentangling. Right. We know what's,
what's complex. It's entangled. So what do we need
to do? Right. We need to somehow disentangle it.
Right? You're going to get this. You're going to
need to first sort of figure out where it's going.
You're going to have to follow stuff around and
eventually label everything. Right? This is the
start. This is roughly what the process
is like. But again, it's a whole separate
talk to try to talk about simplification. All
right, I'm going to wrap up a couple of slides.
The bottom line is simplicity is a choice. It's
your fault if you don't have a simple system.
And, and I think we have a culture
of complexity, to the extent we all
continue to use these tools that have complex
outputs. We're just in a rut. We're just
self-reinforcing. And we have to get
out of that rut. But again, like I said,
if you're already saying, I know this, I
believe you, I already use something better.
I've already used that whole right
column then hopefully this talk will
give you the basis for talking with
somebody else who doesn't believe.
Right. Talk about simplicity versus
complexity, right? But it is a choice,
right? It requires constant vigilance. We already
saw the guard rails don't yield simplicity.
They don't really help us here. Right.
It requires sensibilities and care.
Your sensibilities about simplicity being equal
to ease of use are wrong. They're just simply
wrong. Right. We saw the definitions of simple
and easy. They're completely different things,
right? So easy is not simple. You have to start
developing sensibilities around entanglement.
That's what you have to just, you
have to have entanglement radar,
right? You want to look at some software
and say, ah, you know, not that I don't
like the names you used or the shape of the
code, or there was a semi-colon. I mean,
that's also important too, but you
want to start seeing complecting.
You want to start seeing interconnections
between things that could be independent.
That's where you're going to get the most
power. All the reliability tools you have,
right. Since they're not about
simplicity, they're all secondary.
Right. They just do not touch
the core of this problem.
Right. They're safety nets, but they're nothing
more than that. So how do we make simplicity easy?
Right. We're going to choose
constructs with simpler
artifacts, right? And avoid constructs
that have complex artifacts.
It's the artifacts. It's not the authoring. As
soon as you get in an argument with somebody
about, oh, we should, we should be using
whatever, get that sorted out, you know,
because however they feel about the shape of
the code, they type in is independent from this.
And this is the thing you have to live with.
We're going to try to create abstractions
that have simplicity as a basis,
right? We're going to spend a little time up
front simplifying things before we get started
and recognize that when you simplify things,
you often end up with more things. Right.
Simplicity is not about counting, right? I'd
have rather have more things hanging nice,
straight down, not twisted together then
just a couple of things tied in and not.
And the beautiful thing about making them separate
is you'll have a lot more ability to change it
which is where I think the benefits lie.
So I think this is a big deal and I hope
everybody's able to bring it into practice or
use this as a tool for convincing somebody else
to do that. So I'll leave you with this. This
is what you say when somebody tries to sell
you a sophisticated type system. Thank you.